# OpenMC Monte Carlo Particle Transport Code

[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/openmc-dev/openmc.svg)](http://openmc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/license.html)
[![Travis CI build status (Linux)](https://travis-ci.org/openmc-dev/openmc.svg?branch=develop)](https://travis-ci.org/openmc-dev/openmc)
[![Code Coverage](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/openmc-dev/openmc/badge.svg?branch=develop)](https://coveralls.io/github/openmc-dev/openmc?branch=develop)

The OpenMC project aims to provide a fully-featured Monte Carlo particle
transport code based on modern methods. It is a constructive solid geometry,
continuous-energy transport code that uses HDF5 format cross sections. The
project started under the Computational Reactor Physics Group at MIT.

Complete documentation on the usage of OpenMC is hosted on Read the Docs (both
for the [latest release](http://openmc.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) and
[developmental](http://openmc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) version). If you are
interested in the project or would like to help and contribute, please send a
message to the OpenMC User's Group [mailing
list](https://groups.google.com/forum/?fromgroups=#!forum/openmc-users).

## Installation

Detailed [installation
instructions](http://openmc.readthedocs.io/en/stable/usersguide/install.html)
can be found in the User's Guide.

## Citing

If you use OpenMC in your research, please consider giving proper attribution by
citing the following publication:

- Paul K. Romano, Nicholas E. Horelik, Bryan R. Herman, Adam G. Nelson, Benoit
  Forget, and Kord Smith, "[OpenMC: A State-of-the-Art Monte Carlo Code for
  Research and Development](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2014.07.048),"
  *Ann. Nucl. Energy*, **82**, 90--97 (2015).

## Troubleshooting

If you run into problems compiling, installing, or running OpenMC, first check
the [Troubleshooting
section](http://openmc.readthedocs.io/en/stable/usersguide/troubleshoot.html) in
the User's Guide. If you are not able to find a solution to your problem there,
please send a message to the User's Group [mailing
list](https://groups.google.com/forum/?fromgroups=#!forum/openmc-users).

## Reporting Bugs

OpenMC is hosted on GitHub and all bugs are reported and tracked through the
[Issues](https://github.com/openmc-dev/openmc/issues) feature on GitHub. However,
GitHub Issues should not be used for common troubleshooting purposes. If you are
having trouble installing the code or getting your model to run properly, you
should first send a message to the User's Group mailing list. If it turns out
your issue really is a bug in the code, an issue will then be created on
GitHub. If you want to request that a feature be added to the code, you may
create an Issue on github.

## License

OpenMC is distributed under the MIT/X
[license](http://openmc.readthedocs.io/en/stable/license.html).
