===================
What's New in 0.4.3
===================

-------------------
System Requirements
-------------------

There are no special requirements for running the OpenMC code. As of this
release, OpenMC has been tested on a variety of Linux distributions, Mac OS X,
and Microsoft Windows 7. Memory requirements will vary depending on the size of
the problem at hand (mostly on the number of nuclides in the problem).

------------
New Features
------------

- Option to report confidence intervals for tally results.
- Rotation and translation for filled cells.
- Ability to explicitly specify <estimator> for tallies.
- Ability to store state points and use them to restart runs.
- Fixed source calculations (no subcritical multiplication however).
- Expanded options for external source distribution.
- Ability to tally reaction rates for individual nuclides within a material.
- Reduced memory usage by removing redundant storage or some cross-sections.
- 3bd35b_: Log-log interpolation for URR probability tables.
- Support to specify labels on tallies (nelsonag_).

---------
Bug Fixes
---------

- 33f29a_: Handle negative values in probability table.
- 1c472d_: Fixed survival biasing with probability tables.
- 3c6e80_: Fixed writing tallies with no filters.
- 460ef1_: Invalid results for duplicate tallies.
- 0069d5_: Fixed bug with 0 inactive batches.
- 7af2cf_: Fixed bug in score_analog_tallies.
- 85a60e_: Pick closest angular distribution for law 61.
- 3212f5_: Fixed issue with blank line at beginning of XML files.

.. _nelsonag: https://github.com/nelsonag
.. _33f29a: https://github.com/openmc-dev/openmc/commit/33f29a
.. _1c472d: https://github.com/openmc-dev/openmc/commit/1c472d
.. _3c6e80: https://github.com/openmc-dev/openmc/commit/3c6e80
.. _3bd35b: https://github.com/openmc-dev/openmc/commit/3bd35b
.. _0069d5: https://github.com/openmc-dev/openmc/commit/0069d5
.. _7af2cf: https://github.com/openmc-dev/openmc/commit/7af2cf
.. _460ef1: https://github.com/openmc-dev/openmc/commit/460ef1
.. _85a60e: https://github.com/openmc-dev/openmc/commit/85a60e
.. _3212f5: https://github.com/openmc-dev/openmc/commit/3212f5
