===================
What's New in 0.5.3
===================

-------------------
System Requirements
-------------------

There are no special requirements for running the OpenMC code. As of this
release, OpenMC has been tested on a variety of Linux distributions, Mac OS X,
and Microsoft Windows 7. Memory requirements will vary depending on the size of
the problem at hand (mostly on the number of nuclides in the problem).

------------
New Features
------------

- Output interface enhanced to allow multiple files handles to be opened
- Particle restart file linked to output interface
- Particle restarts and state point restarts are both identified with the -r
  command line flag.
- Particle instance no longer global, passed to all physics routines
- Physics routines refactored to rely less on global memory, more arguments
  passed in
- CMFD routines refactored and now can compute dominance ratio on the fly
- PETSc 3.4.2 or higher must be used and compiled with fortran datatype support
- Memory leaks fixed except for ones from xml-fortran package
- Test suite enhanced to test output with different compiler options
- Description of OpenMC development workflow added
- OpenMP shared-memory parallelism added
- Special run mode --tallies removed.

---------
Bug Fixes
---------

- 2b1e8a_: Normalize direction vector after reflecting particle.
- 5853d2_: Set blank default for cross section listing alias.
- e178c7_: Fix infinite loop with words greater than 80 characters in write_message.
- c18a6e_: Check for valid secondary mode on S(a,b) tables.
- 82c456_: Fix bug where last process could have zero particles.

.. _2b1e8a: https://github.com/openmc-dev/openmc/commit/2b1e8a
.. _5853d2: https://github.com/openmc-dev/openmc/commit/5853d2
.. _e178c7: https://github.com/openmc-dev/openmc/commit/e178c7
.. _c18a6e: https://github.com/openmc-dev/openmc/commit/c18a6e
.. _82c456: https://github.com/openmc-dev/openmc/commit/82c456
