.TH openmc 1 "November 2012" " " "OpenMC"
.SH NAME
openmc \- Executes the OpenMC Monte Carlo code
.SH DESCRIPTION
This command is used to execute the OpenMC Monte Carlo code. It is assumed that
a set of XML input files has already been created and that HDF5 format cross
sections are available.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBopenmc\fR [\fIoptions\fR] [\fIpath\fR]
.PP
It is assumed that if no
.I path
is specified, the XML input files are present in the current directory.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B "\-c\fR, \fP\-\-volume"
Run in stochastic volume calculation mode
.TP
.B "\-e\fR, \fP\-\-event"
Run using event-based parallelism
.TP
.B "\-g\fR, \fP\-\-geometry-debug"
Run with geometry debugging turned on, where cell overlaps are checked for after
each move of a particle
.TP
.B "\-p\fR, \fP\-\-plot"
Run in plotting mode
.TP
.BI \-r " binaryFile" "\fR,\fP \-\-restart" " binaryFile"
Restart a previous run from a state point or a particle restart file named
\fIbinaryFile\fP.
.TP
.BI \-s " N" "\fR,\fP \-\-threads" " N"
Use \fIN\fP OpenMP threads.
.TP
.B "\-t\fR, \fP\-\-track"
Write tracks for all particles.
.TP
.B "\-v\fR, \fP\-\-version"
Show version information.
.TP
.B "\-h\fR, \fP\-\-help"
Show help message.
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
The behavior of
.B openmc
is affected by the following environment variables.
.TP
.B OPENMC_CROSS_SECTIONS
Indicates the default path to the cross_sections.xml summary file that is used
to locate HDF5 format cross section libraries if the user has not specified the
<cross_sections> tag in
.I materials.xml\fP.
.TP
.B OPENMC_MG_CROSS_SECTIONS
Indicates the default path to an HDF5 file that contains multi-group cross
section libraries if the user has not specified the <cross_sections> tag in
.I materials.xml\fP.
.SH LICENSE
Copyright \(co 2011-2020 Massachusetts Institute of Technology and OpenMC
contributors.
.PP
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of
this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in
the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to
use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of
the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so,
subject to the following conditions:
.PP
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.PP
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR
COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER
IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN
CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
.SH REPORTING BUGS
The OpenMC source code is hosted on GitHub at
https://github.com/openmc-dev/openmc. With a github account, you can submit issues
directly on the github repository that will then be reviewed by OpenMC
developers. Alternatively, you can send a bug report to
.I openmc-users@googlegroups.com\fP.
.SH AUTHOR
Paul K. Romano (\fIpaul.k.romano@gmail.com\fP)
